# NYU_CUSP_PUI_project
The final project submitted for NYU CUSP - Principles of Urban Informatics


**Abstract**

According to a 2018 report by the United Nations’ Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), Earth will reach the crucial threshold of 1.5 degrees Celsius (the “tipping point”) by as early as 2030 (IPCC, 2018). To mitigate this crisis, many countries like the United States have adopted new greenhouse gas reduction plans. Under President Biden’s plan, one of the goals is to establish a carbon emissions-free power sector by 2035. Our project has scrutinized this plan by determining where the power sector as a whole stands in this current decarbonization race based on the variation of dependence on different renewable and non-renewable energy sources temporally (over the past 20 years) and spatially, and some of the drastic initiatives the power industry must take to reach zero carbon by 2035. The project intends to be a reminder of the bleak reality that the world is facing when it comes to climate change and how any half-hearted measures will fall far short of the needed impact.

**Methodology:**

K-means clustering:

In order to detect patterns in our data, K-means clustering was used to group states by their fuel type and the amount of power generated from each type. Distinguishing states based on similar fuel-type profiles give an overall picture of which states are lagging or progressing in their efforts to shift from non-renewable to renewable sources of energy. 
The K-means clustering analysis was based on yearly data by the US Energy Information Administration and focused on four separate years: 2005, 2010, 2015, and 2020. For each year, the power generated from every renewable and non-renewable energy source was found in each state and normalized for each state by their total energy output to get their size-independent fuel type profile. After applying clustering to the states by their profile, the number of clusters (k) was determined by calculating the silhouette coefficient. Finally, the clustered states can be visualized along with the categorical fuel-type profile of each cluster.
The same clustering analysis was performed by looking at power companies instead of states in order to analyze how the fuel-type profiles are clustered at the company level. 

Temporal Prediction - Business-as-usual scenario:

Historical trends in carbon emissions data sourced from EPA were analyzed and an Auto-Arima time-series forecasting model was applied to predict progression by 2025 without any additional commitments from energy companies to reduce emissions. The main question being, if efforts to decarbonize are not taken seriously and do not materialize, then what will our future carbon levels look like?
The data was taken from EPA for each generation facility at a monthly level from January 2005 to September 2021. The data was then grouped at the owner company level and visualized temporally. The Auto - Arima Univariate Time Series model was used to predict monthly data for the period of October 2021 to December 2025. For the purposes of the result visualization, the sum of CO2 emissions at the yearly level was calculated, where for 2021, the sum was from actual data till September and predicted data for the last three months. The result was visualized as a line graph along with other scenarios discussed further in this section.
The scenario assumptions are predicted based on the values by using the AAA version of the Exponential Smoothing (ETS) algorithm using yearly coal composition in the total energy generation.

Emission calculator:

In order to convert energy consumption to its GHG emission, the conversion matrix given by EPA was referred to convert net energy requirement by year 2025 and based on fuel type usage. As mentioned in the matrix, for per million kWh of electricity generated by each fuel type, pounds per kWh of Co2 emission was calculated. 
